guides/following-plans.md, before:

---
topic: Following Plans
trigger: Read before executing a detailed implementation plan.
version: 1.0.0
---

# Following Plans

## Overview

Detailed implementation plans, often made up of multiple phases, need a methodical workflow to be executed successfully. This workflow relies on deploying agents to take care of individual tasks.

### Requirements

To apply this guide, you must also learn from the `implementing-complex-features` guides.

## Workflow

Plans are sequence of phases, each of which can be treated as a feature implementation. To progressively implement a plan, follow this workflow:

1. **Select phase.** If you don't know the current phase of the plan, examine the project state to decide. If you already know, move on.

1. **Implement phase.** Follow the `implementing-complex-features` workflow (which handles implementation, and review of each phase internally).

3. **Checkpoint.** After the phase is implemented, review the newly added commits and ask the user whether to continue to the next phase, or do something else. Give your recommendation, and await instructions.

When the workflow requires adaptation, inform the user with your rationale.

Commit message:

using-agents: migrate from implementing-complex-features

guides/following-plans.md, after:

---
topic: Following Plans
trigger: Read before executing a detailed implementation plan.
version: 1.0.0
---

# Following Plans

## Overview

Detailed implementation plans, often made up of multiple phases, need a methodical workflow to be executed successfully. This workflow relies on deploying agents to take care of individual tasks.

## Workflow

Plans are sequence of phases, each of which can be treated as a feature implementation. To progressively implement a plan, follow this workflow:

1. **Select phase.** If you don't know the current phase of the plan, examine the project state to decide. If you already know, move on.

1. **Implement phase.** Follow the steps of the plan to reach the end of the phase. If instructed to use agents, follow the `` workflow (which handles implementation, and review of each phase internally).

3. **Checkpoint.** After the phase is implemented, review the newly added commits and ask the user whether to continue to the next phase, or do something else. Give your recommendation, and await instructions.

When the workflow requires adaptation, inform the user with your rationale.
